## Mathematics and Perfectionism

During my mathematics studies I noticed that I developed more and more a tendency towards perfectionism, something which I regret and lament. But, I feel that this is a difficulty more mathematics students struggle with. I have no evidence for this, not in the traditional sense, but I sometimes notice the same tiredness in students; the same struggle. So, I wanted to lay out how mathematics interacts with perfectionism and compare it with other studies. I also want to compare university studies with working life, and the struggles I have post university.

Recently, I talked to a linguistics student about her perfectionism compared to my own. She is aware about the pressure she feels in writing a paper. Similar to how I remember myself feeling pressured in my papers. In both cases we write a paper and we are being graded on that paper. So, it could be argued that the act of being graded is what causes the perfectionistic tendency. And, there is a good argument for this. Grading students means that they are implicitly compared and they are given a distance from a target. Give someone a goal and the means to pursue it and they will pursue, if even for a little bit, particularly if it is a goal which many friends share with.

But the same can be said for games. I play plenty of games with my friends, but I'm not obsessed with any of them. Granted, a study takes a lot more time than playing a game so degrees of orders might play a factor. Regardless, I have played games where I started with optimizing turns and ended up with just playing whatever feels right, which is the opposite of perfectionistic tendencies.

So how does playing games differ from writing papers? And how does maths differ even more?

My friend told me she felt the unpredictability of a grade made her obsess more about her paper. She couldn't know if she did it right or wrong. She could guess that she did a good job of it, but she couldn't know.

When writing maths papers, I never felt that same stress. I felt it when writing my thesis, but never with a simple paper. Contrary to linguistics where students get often tested via papers, mathematics students (on my university) got tested a lot via quizes. In particularly, we got a lot of 'proof these five statements' types of exams. This is a natural form for theoretical maths to take. If you understand the material then you should be able to do a mini version of what profs need to do frequently. It is part of the basic skill set of a mathematician.

However, mathematics proofs are special. A mathematician doesn't argue, or proof by probability. Instead, a mathematics proof is a series of complete and logically correct statements which follow one another until you may conclude the theorem you tried to proof. Once you get used to proving with mathematics it becomes very easy to check if your proof is correct. You follow your statements and verify if each is a correct conclusion from previous statements. 

For example, suppose I want to prove that `x=0.999...` implies `x=1`. If `x=0.999...` with infinite trailing nines, then I know that `10*x = 9.999...`. Another way of writing `9.999...` is as `9+x`. Hence, I know that we must have `10*x = 9+x`. Subtracting `x` from both sides of the equation gives `9*x = 9`. Now dividing both sides by `9` gives `x=1`. Thus, if `x=0.999...` then `x=1`.

You can check this proof and it is correct: mathematically, `0.999...` is equal to `1`. This is a piece of magic and why I love math. Trailing nines always wrap up to a nice `+1` on the last non-nine digit. There are various ways we can proof this fact and they go back to how we think about numbers, in this case how having simple algebra rules leads to a deep insight in the way we write numbers. So we can argue the assumptions, the algebra rules and how we think about infinite trailing nines, but we can't argue about the proof itself. Given the algebra rules, this proof is completely correct and every step can be verified by checking those rules.

This makes math completely different from most other fields of research. In maths there is no 'maybe'. It is so, it isn't so, or it is impossible to proof. And, exam questions are always either the first or the second, though throughout your studies you will be taught examples of the third.

This makes maths exams completely contrary to papers. Where my friend struggled with knowing if it is good enough and keeps working on the paper, I had it easy in predetermining my grade. If you write down a proof with a step that doesn't work, then you might as well discount that question. Your proof is wrong and you know it, your grade is going to reflect the mistake. Thus, count the questions where you know your proof is correct (and verify theorems you used) and you have a good estimate of your grade beforehand. Exams are easy, right? Well, you know they aren't. This is mathematcs; many people struggle with it. And, you have to find the correct (dare I say, perfect) path from the assumptions to the conclusion.

Where does perfectionism come from for me? From ten years of these types of exams. Ten years of demands for verifiable perfection. And, I'm noticing the fall out. My last job, I had to write a reflection. On my second reflection I spend ten minutes on the toilet trying to calm myself down. I never finished that reflection.

I'm not the type of guy who is naturally perfectionistic. Look at this website, it is far from perfect. I don't mind that. There is no reason for it to be perfect. It would just take a lot of time and a lot of effort for little gain.

However, when I care it suddenly needs to be perfect. When I reflected on my job and noticed mistakes, that was fine. I was a new employee, perfection is not at all expected. Arguably in a job it is never expected. Results, consistency, trust is what is expected. But, when I had to actively reflect on why I did a bad it went to hell. All the old machinery started turning; I started stripping away at my mistakes; my thoughts went deep inside to my core being and how what defines me caused these mistakes. In ten years I have become very good at stripping away the flesh and following the tendrils to bones. There is no place I can hide from myself. No place where I can pretend to be safe. Because, I know when I made a mistake, and that makes me wrong. 

I'm not making writing a reflection again. I'd rather be fired, out of a canon into the sun, than to do that to myself again.

If you are a mathematics student, or are struggling with perfectionism. You are not alone. The world isn't perfect, and fluidity is what makes us as a species strong. There is great benefit in just doing and failing. And most of all, there are things that you can do that perfectionism can't touch. For me that is making art, and doing data science. You can do well, you can do great, but there is no perfect. The value of art is a product of the time of the evaluator. There is no perfect art piece, because there will always be someone at some time who just doesn't feel it. Similarly, there is no perfect answer to a data question. When the stars align and all the assumptions are true, then we could find the perfect answer, but this is never the case in practice. You can get good answers and great aswers. You can maybe find a fantastic answer. You can't find a perfect answer, unless your data is perfect. It never is or will be.

And, no, you can't verify the validity of this thesis. Humans use metaphors and rhetorics for a reason, because it cuts quicker to the heart of the matter than stripping away to the fundamentals of our universe.
